CALVIN TRILLIN does not like turkey. He has called it “basically something college dormitories use to punish students for hanging around on Sunday.” In 1981, he suggested in The New Yorker that Americans gather around the Thanksgiving table for an unlikely substitute: pasta carbonara. He imagined that it was served at the first Thanksgiving, confounding both the Indians and the Pilgrims, who declared it “heretically tasty” and “the work of the devil.”
Multimedia
 
Slide Show
A Very Carbonara Thanksgiving
Recipes

Spaghetti Carbonara
Shortcut Guanciale
Spaghetti Friuliano

Thanksgiving Help Line
Have a holiday quandary? The Dining section staff is answering your questions.
Read Questions and Answers »
What type of knife do you recommend for turkey carving?
Answered by SAM SIFTON
How can I get my house ready in a hurry?
Answered by FLORENCE FABRICANT
Can I make turkey in a microwave?
Answered by JEFF GORDINIER
Enlarge This Image
 
Daniel Krieger for The New York Times
Mr. Carmellini placing spaghetti in the dish. More Photos »
Readers’ Comments
Readers shared their thoughts on this article.
Read All Comments (82) »
This has yet to catch on. But he did capture something of the spirit of carbonara.

Unlike healthy but often bland turkey, it is not a puritanical dish; it is a deli egg-bacon-and-cheese-on-a-roll that has been pasta-fied, fancified, fetishized and turned into an Italian tradition that, like many inviolate Italian traditions, is actually far less old than the Mayflower. Because America may have contributed to its creation, carbonara is Exhibit A in the back-and-forth between Italy and the United States when it comes to food.

Carbonara also inspires strong, almost religious, passions, particularly about what exactly it is. Mr. Trillin’s recipe — pancetta, fontina and prosciutto — would be scoffed at in Rome. But according to one Italian food historian, there are at least 400 versions, from the most classic Roman to variations that are delicious but drive traditionalists mad.  

Though Mr. Trillin did not address the subject, carbonara can be tricky to make well, partly because it is so simple: at base, egg, cheese, cured pork, pasta and black pepper. There is little margin for error. I learned this to my great embarrassment at a poolside party a few years ago with a bunch of posh Italians and their sunburned, hungry children.  

•

My wife has more confidence in my cooking skills than I do. When we were posted in Italy (I was the New York Times correspondent in Rome), she volunteered me to make carbonara at a party one summer afternoon in Tuscany. The host was a contessa, the mother of one of our sons’ school friends. I am American, and I could tell most of the guests did not hold much hope.  

I hadn’t made much carbonara before and told her, “I’m nervous.”

She said, “You should be.”

It all went terribly. It was too hot for most Italians to enjoy heavy carbonara. I didn’t bring enough guanciale, the cured pig cheeks that for many Italians have become indispensable for carbonara. I had to chuck in some pancetta (pork belly as opposed to cheek) that the host had in the fridge. For this crowd, pancetta simply was not done. I botched the eggs to the point that they were scrambled. 

No Italian adult would touch it, except the contessa, who did so with well-bred, fork-plucking politeness. But the children gobbled it down because — and this is the curse and the key to carbonara — eggs, bacon, cheese and pasta taste great, almost no matter what. It’s worth the effort, though, to get right, and that’s what I’ve striven for since, to the point of curing my own guanciale at home, which is less difficult than it sounds. No obsession here, I swear.

•

“If I had to pick five dishes I would take to the grave with me, this would be one,” said Fred Plotkin, the food historian and author of “Italy for the Gourmet Traveler.” “It’s so good, and if I’m going to the grave I don’t have to worry about cholesterol.”

We can stipulate that carbonara is not health food, but now and then, it’s hard to resist. The harder question is which carbonara you would take to the other side. One with guanciale, pancetta or plain bacon? Only pecorino cheese, made from sheep’s milk? Or is a bit of Parmesan O.K.? Peas or not? Onion? Whole eggs or yolks? 

Or, heaven forbid, the ingredient that most divides devotees of a dish that, above all, aims for creaminess: actual cream? 

“No cream!” barked Andrea Dal Monte, a Roman and the owner of Campo de’ Fiori in Brooklyn, who used to be a manager and sommelier at the celebrated Del Posto in Manhattan. These were the first words out of his mouth, followed by many, many more.  

One problem is that the exact origin of carbonara is unknown, which leaves room for endless variations and opinions.